In the last three lectures we created some useful query scopes for example to get the most commented
blog post.
Most active users and most active users last month.
So at the beginning of this section we actually started with creating a global query scope.
So let's go to the Visual Studio code and while the basic difference between local and global query
scope is here you can see the use search of the local query scope so we call them are static methods
of the model and you have to call them explicitly which means you actually have to type that method
and call it soda.
Then only only then local query scope is being applied but it's different with the global query scopes
like we created this latest scope when we wanted models to be out magically sorted by the most recent
creation date.
But the problem with that was that this part of the query was added to every possible query that got
executed for a particular model.
In our case this was a blog post model so we registered that for blog post model and for the comment
model as well.
And this caused some issues that when we used the aggregate functions like count to get the count of
all the elements in the model or all the records inside our database table this didn't really play out
well when we wanted to sort by a different column without adding a group by statement.
You might remember that we had to modify their strict settings inside the database and I've told you
that that's not the best idea to hide the problems under the carpet now so it is a good time to actually
show you a much better use example of the global query scope so let's go ahead and create another one
which would be a much better example of where you should apply the global query scopes so let's logging
into our application as John which is John Doe our admin and go to the blog posts so you can see that
all the blog posts are there.
And now let's modify the permissions of our admin.
So this is this gate override that we give some special permissions to particular users.
Now let's also give back the admin the delete right.
So now he can delete some blog posts.
Now you can see when we refresh those blog posts that we had there are no longer here.
So maybe if we are authenticated as a not meaning we should be able to see all the blog posts even those
that were self deleted but they still exist inside the database.
So let's see how we can do that.
Let's go ahead and create a new scope inside the scopes folder and let's call it delete it are the mean
scope.
Now we can copy the code from this latest scope because this would be almost the same but let's immediately
remove the query because we all have something completely different in here.
And of course let's rename the class to delete that are the mean scope not what what we will try to
achieve is we would like to give admin opportunity to see all the blog posts even those that were deleted
so we can achieve that by utilizing the south facade as you can see that's the namespace for the Alpha
Site.
Press enter and you will have that automatically added by Visual Studio code.
Now there is a check method inside this facade which will return true if the current user is authenticated.
So let's add an if statement if our check and then of has another method called the user which will
get you the currently authenticated user.
Now this check will actually check if the user is authenticated so we can safely call user and we'll
check if the user current user is an admin.
Well if the user is an admin we can use with trashed method on the query builder which will also include
all the self deleted models for our particular model.
So now if we'll add this global query scope for a particular model then if you are on admin or you are
currently authenticated as an admin user you will see everything.
So let's save this and go to our blog post model
and now let's add a different query scope not the latest scope but deleted admin scope.
Mind that this is ultimately adding on import for me.
Be sure that you have added this manually if this doesn't do it automatically for you.
So let's save the changes and you can see that we have deleted some blog posts before so now I haven't
refreshed the page but when I do and I am authenticated as John Doe who is an admin I should now see
the blog post that I've previously deleted.
Well it says it cannot find a method we've thrashed.
Of course I've misspelled the metal name sorry for that with trashed
now.
I'm not really sure if I see those blog posts so let's comment that out and it seems it doesn't really
change anything.
So another thing you should know about self deletes is it is actually working by utilizing a global
query scope.
So that's the class that is being added or global query scope that is being added to your models when
you use the soft deletes trade.
And we do that here inside that blog post model.
So what we will have to do is since this global query scope self deleting scope is taking precedence
and it is actually modifying our query.
So let's make sure that we add this other global query scope call before the Parent Board.
So parent board will actually boot your model and will also check what is inside the traits and when
it finds that you are using the soft delete straight it will add proper global query scope which prevents
us from seeing the results that we want.
So let's go back to our deleted admin scope.
All right.
Now we would like to see that trashed post.
So those are not trashed post nuts.
Now let's refresh the page and well you can see that I am now seeing models.
So this one the most recent one I have deleted those free and still I can see them because I am an admin
if I will log out and go to the blog posts.
You can see I cannot see them now.
It's not really visual.
Right now what is happening probably it's hard for you to remember all those titles and it is for me
too.
So let's just log in and go to that index template for the blog posts so I can somehow modify the way
they are shown.
If they are actually deleted
so let's modify this template a little bit so we will use an if statement.
Now you might remember that the model that is using the soft delete straight has another method called
trap trashed which will return true if the model was soft delete it so we can add if post trashed
and if it was trashed we'll add another element that delete element.
Actually we probably might have to do that inside the H free.
OK.
So let's do something like this
sorry for that.
OK.
Let's copy this fragment and now we'll also are the closing element if of course that post was trashed.
All right now let's go back here and.
Well now you should see that pretty clearly that when the post is deleted we are striking through the
title.
Now we can also add some additional possible styling for the link element.
So we will add a conditional class
so if the Post e is trashed will that text muted class.
So this would be a great title if it's not deleted then we want add anything go.
OK let's save the changes and refresh.
So now it should be pretty clear what is happening.
So if I will delete another blog post let's say this one.
You can see that blog post was deleted and now it is being strike through and grey.
But if I log out I do not see those posts.
Now let's log in again.
And another thing you can see is there is a most active user can I on my Glenn.
So let's try to find her and delete all the blog posts that she has.
Are that maybe also this one
this one
and this one.
OK.
That should be enough.
Now what you see here is she is still being most active writer because because I've added this global
query scope that we include the self deleted models.
She is being included into all the queries.
But now notice what happens if I will log out.
So I do log out and now when I go to the blog post list the most active user is now John Doe.
So I've deleted most of her blog posts and you can see here in the results of the search inside the
browser that she only has one.
So if she's not included anywhere.
So this is a power of the global query scopes.
And what we can do with them now what we can also do is as you can see on the blog post least when you
are authenticated as an mean that there is still a button to delete a blog post where it shouldn't actually
be because those posts are already deleted.
So here when we check whether the posts can be deleted we are basically checking for that authorization
right.
So what we can additionally do is we can surround this with an if statement and if the post is not trashed
we only then check for the rights to delete it and then show the bottom so now when you refresh this
you you see that well you can't actually delete this anymore because obviously it is actually deleted
already.
Now let's do one more thing or basically I will show you one more thing.
So what we are doing here is we are telling a lot of old that it should also include trashed models
but as I've told you basically this work is being achieved by this self deleting scope which is part
of the larval framework and it is our global query scope that is being added when you use the self delete
straight on your model.
Now instead of calling we've trashed we can also do another thing which is eliminating our global scope
so we can do without global scope and now we'll have to add a full class name of this global query scope
which is eliminate database eloquent soft deleting scope
so this can be commented out save the changes here if you are.
Well if I'm doing things too fast don't worry.
This would also be included into coming to this lecture so you can always check that out.
So don't worry if you if it is too fast.
So what we did is instead of calling with trust we removed our global query scope.
So this is by the way how you can remove the global query scope for a particular query.
So what I mean is global query scopes are applied to all the queries inside this model.
So if you have a global query scope that you would like to use most of the time.
But there are some exceptions where you wouldn't like to use it.
This is how.
How can you remove it from one particular query and mind that you do not have to do that inside another.
Another global query scope this can be done anywhere like for example inside the post control or you
can call it here without global query scope.
Now let's see if this would have the same effect.
So now you see that when we refresh the page we still see the blog posts that were deleted and well
I basically achieved that by removing this soft deleting scope from the well from the global query scopes
that are applied if I will comment that out and say the changes.
Now I want to see the deleted blog posts are self deleted blog posts even though I am an admin so there
are both ways to achieve the same thing.
In this particular case but this is generally a way you would remove a global query scope from one particular
query that you would like to execute.